[Music]
It's
good to eat, not to listen to that thing and then feel disgusted. If you
like it, then you have
something else you don't like.
Yes, I like it too much.
When it's cool, I like it too much. When it's too hot, it's too hot.
This makes it even hotter. It doesn't make the
heat worse, it only makes others feel it worse. For
example, my own preferences. I encourage
people to like what they like,
not to encourage others.
Encouraging others becomes a
means of teaching, understand? For example,
teachers go to the workers, and they say, "It's
so hot!" That means they
empathize with the workers, making
them feel they have something to
share, and they know it's hot, so the
workers can calm down. Understand?
But it's not that people are too hot,
remember that so you don't criticize or praise. And what about
ordinary people?
If they don't have the ability to encourage
others, they won't complain about the heat,
but they still know it's hot naturally. It's not that they're too hot, understand? That
means naturally, when it's cool...
People only know it's a cool breeze and they
enjoy that coolness, do you understand?
They enjoy the coolness.
But when you say it's too cool, then
you're not enjoying the
coolness. That is, if you follow that saying, you're
not enjoying it, do you understand?
So, when the wind is cool and you're
hot, if it cools you down, just leave it there and you will
feel and enjoy the coolness.
Do you understand? It's like
having something delicious, saying "It's so delicious,
so delicious!" When you say "it's
so delicious," someone else has already
eaten almost all of it.
Do you understand?
That's the explanation so you understand.
When anything comes to you,
you must enjoy and feel it,
not take it away. That means
taking it away, taking it outside, you ca
n't enjoy it, you can't feel it. If
you don't, then
later when you practice, it will be difficult to
attain joy and happiness. Do you understand?
So, when something brings
joy to you, when suffering and
painful sensations are at their worst, you
begin to enjoy it, and
from that enjoyment, you awaken
to the suffering. At the very moment of awakening to the suffering,
you then experience a
sense of peace. That's why people who
know how to practice rarely talk about it,
understand? Because they usually
enjoy everything that comes their
way. But for example, like Yen, who
was in prison, when she heard
a story about a tree,
some people were discussing what kind of creature it was that grew
there by itself, or something else. Yen
didn't know who it was,
but there was a group of people, Yen did
n't know who they were,
but they were discussing whether the
tree grew by itself or what kind of creature
came there. That means we've
wasted valuable time
on things that don't
benefit us, because how can we?
Because it's just a tree.  This, in my opinion, is
something... something... something that grows... So I
went to research what it was, what it was that grew.
Therefore, I had to go there to
find out what was right and what was wrong. That means I
lost myself for a
very long time. You see, right?
We lost ourselves for a
very long time, and that didn't
bring any benefit to ourselves. It only
returned the story of the bird
coming or the tree growing on its own, and it
didn't affect us at all. Therefore, sentient beings
are trapped because their minds are
constantly restless. This restlessness
in suffering, you see? Yen is just speaking
softly about the walking meditation of a
practitioner. From that, we walk
like that. We see that
people who know how to practice are
happy. Very happy. So
why do people crave
life in the forest, where clouds fly, wind blows, birds sing, and
all creatures give people
enjoyment and peace? The teacher understands,
right? People know meditation, they
know contemplation, they know how to think...
People live very fulfilling lives, not just going out there with
five or seven friends,
sitting around telling funny stories. That's
not fun, Master. It's not
fun, and it actually causes
suffering in the present. Because you might
lose friends because of the pointless struggles and competition.
Losing friends and competing only
increases ego. You see, that's
right. And in a while,
that delusion will come back to you, Master.
Because whatever happens,
it will reverberate back to you
later, causing you great suffering. You
see, we only experience a little bit
of what a practitioner experiences, just a tiny bit of the peacefulness
of practice. People
practice together, in a
very pure and peaceful community, and they often enjoy the joy of the
Dharma together.
But what about us out there? We
struggle, taking back what we've lost.
What do we enjoy? We don't get any
reward. That's why we
often experience...  Some people, when they fulfill their duties as
Buddhists,
say, "That's enough. I'll go outside and do my work, I'll
also progress." Remember, that's just a karmic attachment;
it's not the ultimate liberation. Isn't that why
practitioners benefit more?
From that, we must
show respect to those who have renounced the world and become monks. Do you understand? It's
not about constantly nagging, "
This woman keeps saying she wants to become a monk but refuses." Do
you understand? It's not like
that. Therefore, each person has their own
path to enlightenment, each person at any level of practice has their own path to enlightenment.
We Buddhists can help others, but we keep
talking about this husband who doesn't go to the
temple. We keep trying to help,
but practitioners are
n't narrow-minded. They
can help many people.
So we must cherish the
thoughts and intentions we have when we practice, all of which
benefit the world. We can let go of three
days of practice, and
our thoughts and intentions turn inward, liberating
our minds and truly following them.  For example, the
things Yen is giving to the
public are: when we walk, we
only focus on our footsteps,
just placing our feet and
stepping. If any distracting thoughts arise,
we shouldn't follow those thoughts. That
is, from
those distracting thoughts, we shouldn't let any more thoughts arise.
Do you understand?
That mental state is the mental state of stopping karma.
If any sentient being is carrying evil
karma and harming the world, they will
stop that karma. If someone's cultivation capacity
is great, and you
see that their cultivation capacity is very great, then it will be
like that. Now, Yen looks up at
that group and sees someone
meditating there. Who is
that person? Their power of harmony
prevents all other groups from
harming them. If someone has the power of harmony
within the liberated group,
then our group is a
liberated group, and their mind is directed towards liberation from
desire, then no demon will
invade.  That congregation, let's go.
In the Pure and Harmonious Congregation, we must remember that
the power of harmony is immense.
Harmony and unity are essential for the congregation, understood? When Yen
tells the congregation to go with them
to guide them in their practice, if someone
runs off, it means they don't intend to be harmonious and
unified. If they
disagree, they must say, "No, let me go first, let
me go first, let me go first."
If they don't say anything, it means they agree to
go first, understood? But if
someone goes ahead on their own, it means they do
n't belong to the congregation, that they
themselves are not in harmony. Not saying it out loud creates
karma that disrupts the harmony of the congregation. It's
very simple. If
we have offered something and
accepted it, and then we disrupt it, we are destroying
ourselves. If a
congregation practices like that, it will
not
benefit sentient beings nor ourselves,
understood? That's the next time, so
we can understand and practice what
we have agreed to.  Once we've discussed and agreed,
we must abide by it. That is, this is
our opinion, our own opinion. But if we ourselves break it, we will
never experience the
karmic consequences and will succeed in
anything. Remember
this principle of cause and effect. If we disagree with someone,
we must raise our hand and say, "I
don't agree with this," or "I wish to
leave this group." This person will
only suffer their own karma, not the
new karma. But if we have
agreed and then do something different, that means
we are dissatisfied with
ourselves. This means that later, we will have the
karma of
those who caused us to be
restless. For example, if someone eats
this cake and feels uncomfortable, eats
this and feels uncomfortable, works at
that place and feels uncomfortable, moves to a new place
and feels uncomfortable, and goes to any place and feels
uncomfortable—that is the cause. Do you
understand, assembly? It means that nowhere can we find
peace because we ourselves have broken ourselves. Do you
understand, assembly?
Therefore, we...  In spiritual practice,
we must pay attention to even the smallest details of
our lives. We also apply the law of cause and effect to
small things, we observe the law of cause and effect, and then
we will benefit. So,
here, I only share
a little with the public. That's two or three karmic connections
already. Going here isn't
superfluous. If from now on, when I see
my friends fiercely fighting over a
problem, after listening,
I see if that problem is beneficial
or not, whether it's practical and
can solve their present problem. For
example, they are discussing a problem,
and then they consult it. This means that if
this problem is practical, I can participate,
but it's something
unrelated to them.
Like when a tree grows or a bird
carries something there, I hear it
and remember that my karma doesn't get
involved anymore. Because I haven't yet. That way,
later on, I won't have the karma of delusional
thoughts, meaning my mind will be at
peace, not disturbed by
things I don't intentionally focus on.  Is
that clear? It's not intentional that it causes us to
be restless; our sleep
naturally becomes disturbed. That means it's
very common in one person, but
it has many negative consequences. A
small cause can have many negative consequences.
Then that cause will lead us
to encounter gossip and
slander, and we'll have to get involved
and waste so much of
our time. And then there are the
very painful consequences. So
we will avoid very
good karma. There are three days of meditation, but
what kind of karmic connection is this to speak of? It's not something that just happens
naturally. The karmic connection
is for the masses, so I will speak
to the masses. Now, on this
journey, does anyone have any great desires or thoughts? Do you
remember? Namo Buddha
Shakyamuni. On the
way here, the Buddhist thinks that they are
on a Vietnam Airlines plane from
Saigon to Hanoi and see the
beautiful scenery of the country. Under
this scene, it evokes memories of...  The country is very
beautiful. And I thought, "It's so beautiful,
yet America brought bombs
here to destroy it. That's truly cruel." And the
second thought was, when passing by
those beer cans and those shells, the
Buddhist thought, "It's the descendants
of the King who are killing." Oh Buddha! Greetings, I'll explain to
you all here:
While flying on the Vietnam Airlines plane,
I was sitting by the
window, looking down at the
village, and I felt joy. Do you understand?
That is, I felt joy. "Oh, it's so beautiful!"
This thought continued to follow
me. Do you understand?
This thought came from having done something similar,
having been on a plane like that, and
this thought
echoed like that. If this is...  When we
practice meditation, we stop, okay? That's what we
stop. If we don't stop, it
means we keep thinking, "Just keep
going," okay? That thought
belongs to the past, but if
we can't stop it, that
thought will continue to arise.
For example, we might think, "
Wow, I love it! It's so beautiful!" That thought
arises again,
and then another one
happens. Do you understand? It just keeps repeating itself, never stopping. It's like, wherever it arises, it keeps returning. Do you understand? That joy arises
from
desires, and that thought is still
disturbing the mind. Do you understand? That's why, when we practice meditation,
we have to sever this joy—this joy is
from desires, not the joy of attaining enlightenment. The
other kind of joy is
in the Dharma, the joy of enlightenment, and that's different.
So, everyone should just stop.  Don't
think that practicing Buddhism is a small thing, it's
easy. Just recite dozens of Buddha mantras a day and
expect to get
rid of all delusive thoughts. No, that won't work. From things like
this, we value practice.
If the community is afflicted by desire, then the
community should immediately turn to contemplation to
eliminate that desire. Yen will
guide the community. When that desire
arises, the community only needs to contemplate suffering
once, and it will disappear. The community understands, right?
This is because we are attached to this
desire.
This will be the source of suffering for
future delusive thoughts, it will be unease. If
we let go of this joy and pleasure,
naturally, this joy and pleasure will
disappear. Next time, we won't be afflicted by delusive thoughts. Do you understand
? However, this is the opportunity for those who practice in the forest; that's how it works. Outside, it's too late. These desires immediately move on to something else; there's no time for understanding, no opportunity to eliminate them.
Where is the opportunity to awaken? Because it's all about what's
happening here. There are people, there are people,
there's a wife, for example, Mr. Hai Anh is still urging me on like
that, how can I give up those desires?
How can I now
think about what I'll say tomorrow when I get home? That's what I'm thinking,
not just imagining it.
They say, "
Tomorrow I'll say this, if I
say I'll do this, I'll do
that." This idea is still based on the principle of intention to break
karma,
but it hasn't reached that level of practice yet. That means it's not yet at that level of practice. Do
you understand? It's not that level yet.
That level requires all the
practitioners to go into the forest. Do you understand? Only then
can they practice. That's
just theory, do you understand? This
is what Yen is telling you so you can
understand what a practitioner is like.
Why do people
stay in the forest for so long? Why do they
like to go outside? Do you understand? It's
not that they're
crazy or something.  You say
people are lazy and go to the forest, but going to
this forest is
much harder than down there, Teacher Bi, right? Going
into this forest means living with all kinds of
circumstances, not just the
boredom of being alone. It's already hard enough for everyone to
overcome that without
observational thinking and meditation; you can't survive alone. That's
why King Tran Nhan Tong abandoned everything
to go to the forest to practice asceticism. Otherwise,
who would go to the forest to practice asceticism?
Hieu, regarding the plan, during
the process of walking up from below,
you had these distracting thoughts:
wanting to see, wanting to look outside to see
how beautiful it was. You kept having these thoughts, and you kept focusing on
one direction, following
behind Ms. Yen straight to here. Almost throughout the
process, you didn't focus on the
outside, you had these thoughts. And when you
got here, you had the thought of pushing Ms. Yen down
like this. Repentance, Ms. Yen. Just a thought. No,
not a thought. This is what
Hieu did.  Hieu has the desire to
look at something. This is desire, it's
normal, okay? When our mind wants to look,
that's the power of karma,
remember that, everyone. We want and we don't
want, but we don't. This desire
is the power of karma, do you
understand? When we look at something,
we won't detect the
power of karma anymore. When we
see it, we're immediately pulled away, so
how can we detect the power? But when
we pull it back, for example, if
someone pulls us, for example, if they pull us,
we don't feel
their power. But if they pull
us back, then we pull them back, then we
feel their force.
Do you understand? Keep pulling back and forth,
then you'll
clearly see the power of karma. Desire is
urging us on. It pulls us out, then pulls us in,
pulls us out, looks in, pulls us out, meaning we want to
look down, up, down there, whatever it is.
This is what makes us
unable to concentrate, do you understand? We can't
concentrate because of the question...
What was it again? Because in many lifetimes we
have had karma, what was it again? Then we
run out to see if it's true, what's the accident,
what's it, in our neighborhood,
what's it? That's the power of
this karma, it has been accumulated over many lifetimes, and
now it's still developing.
If a
person doesn't know how to practice, then this will only
accumulate more and more.
But how do we deal with this when we
are doing something, and we
hear a voice next to us or
about a problem? When we analyze
that voice and need our help,
we respond. Otherwise, if we don't get
help,
we try to pull it back and forth, understand?
Pull it back and forth to prevent it from going away,
understand? Pull it through, we must
win, understand? No matter what, we
must win in the end.
Next time, if we can concentrate, then we
understand. But Yen still says it's very
difficult, because lay people can't
do it. This is just called feeling, just
feeling. And what about another one?  Furthermore,
Hieu said that going down here means Hieu has
something he thinks is like Yen falling down
here, and this is very common, do you understand?
That's very normal and very
common. It means that if Yen helps someone practice, there will always
be these kinds of issues,
so you understand, right? Because this
will eliminate the karma of harming those who
have helped you, being ungrateful. That's
why in Buddhism, we cultivate a grateful heart, do you
understand? Usually, when we don't
know, we ask others to teach
us, but when we become skilled, we want
them to disappear so we can
do things for ourselves, to become famous, to gain
fame. This karma works
in business and in all things;
it always has karmic consequences. That's
why, in Buddhist practice, one must
have the Four Gratitudes fully to eliminate
this karma. This is the thought of
that karma, and it comes from within our
thoughts. Turn your thoughts towards gratitude, and
you'll understand, right? This person
has brought benefit to me, has done something for me, and I
must be grateful to the teacher.  If we haven't yet
returned to the mindset of gratitude, we won't be
able to eliminate that karma, and from that,
new karma will sprout. From the next time
a harmful or malicious thought arises within us,
our actions will be
supportive, you see. That means it has to
continue for a long time, like this...  It takes time and time for it to become
pure, not immediately, okay
everyone? That
means we must practice sincerely. For
example, if you're annoyed with
someone and have a strong intention, but then you say something that does
n't harm them, that's a
very long process of cultivation. That means your intention is one thing,
but
your actions are different. That means after
a long time of cultivating in that intention, then
gradually cultivating the other,
and finally, you become in accordance with the
Dharma. That means if someone deserves gratitude, you should be
grateful; if someone deserves forgiveness, you should forgive. If
someone harms you,
you should help them get rid of
that intention. That means it takes a very long time. That's
why we believe in the Buddha. The Buddha, through three lifetimes of practice, only then can one
achieve enlightenment. The perfect, true
enlightenment, do you understand? That's
why we must be grateful to the Buddha,
do you understand? It's very grateful because it's so difficult to cultivate like
this, who wouldn't be
grateful? Everyone, do you understand?
Today, everyone, these three days of practice are for the purpose
of...  The masses know that the merits of the
Three Jewels are falling, so that everyone
can understand the thoughts about the merits of the Three Jewels. If you understand, then
everyone should think about it from now until
the end of their lives, until their strength is exhausted. What if some of you all
attain the fruit of Stream-Enterer?
[Laughs]
But I hope the masses will understand the
thoughts about the merits of the Three Jewels, the hidden merits
of the Three Jewels, but you must practice to have
thoughts. When the sky
falls heavily and the masses dare to go out for
three more sessions, then they
go again. Now they go for one session and come back saying, "No,
next time, I'm
afraid." So, in all suffering, we
must stay away from
suffering. Which suffering the Buddha praises? Which suffering the Buddha
does not praise? Suffering that does not lead to the
benefit of liberation, the Buddha does not
praise. For example, jumping into the
river to bathe to wash away sins—that is a wrong
view, do you understand? That is a wrong view. Then there's
squatting—that is, always squatting and then
jumping around—that's how you
walk, then
hopping around. That's it.  It's not
about mental karma, verbal karma,
and physical karma—that is,
those sufferings, like beating
someone until they bleed—
beating them like that to eliminate karma, that's a wrong view,
right? Because karma is born
from this intention first, then
comes the speech, you
see? Then comes the body. Actually, the body
is just a
subordinate of this intention; it's born later
from the intention. If your intention is good, then
your body does good deeds, your speech does
good deeds, you see?
So, mainly, the intention must be good,
then the body is the main focus, and the mind is the main focus. We
focus on the mind; Buddhism focuses on the mind and leads to
liberation of the mind. But other
religions focus on the body, so
their ascetic practices don't
lead to liberation, so the Buddha doesn't praise them.
But the ascetic practices in Buddhism
that lead to liberation are praised by the Buddha.
For example, this person is afraid of
excrement, so they have to pick up excrement.  "Put
the dung away, right? That means
whatever prevents people's minds from being bothered by
unpleasant things,
they must see them clearly. That's what
asceticism leads to—liberation. This is asceticism
leading to liberation,
teacher. Is that clear? Then there's going to shovel
dung to plant rice—that's not right, do
you understand? I'm not afraid of dung because
I like the good rice, that's why I'm not afraid of dung. It's not that it's not that I'm
afraid of dung, but
rather that I have a method to eliminate it. That's how it is, everyone. When
we observe our minds, we see
where the attachments are. We have a method
to eliminate them, and we must
eliminate them. Is that clear? But Yen also
affirms that lay people don't have the opportunity to
practice like that because it's
not this fear that causes the suffering,
but this fear arises from the mind's love,
hate, likes, and desires.
If we don't contemplate and observe, tomorrow
I'll chop my hand into a pile of dung, and I'll only
become that other person. I have to
see what kind of love, hate, likes, and desires
I have. Then I'll do it, teacher."  Not
all the temples and the mindset of
Yen are just telling the public so that the
public can respect the Three Jewels, okay? If you
tell me that you know this, you'll become
arrogant and that will be the end of you.
Our practice is still very
small. Tomorrow, when you read
that vow, you'll clearly see yourself as small, your
practice still inadequate. You'll say, "That's right, I'm
here, that's really me!"
Otherwise, you'll just say, "Go ahead and
read it." Go to someone else's house, go ahead and read it. Then you'll
see that they haven't practiced
anything at all, and you'll see that you've practiced a little more. You wo
n't pay
attention to those vows anymore. If
you read it like this, then when you read it, you'll see yourself as small, your
practice still inadequate, and that feeling of
shame will arise. Otherwise, you'll just keep saying, "
I'm small, my
practice is inadequate," and
keep reading like you're reading poetry, without
any feeling in your heart. People
read it and they need to have a feeling, an
emotion in their hearts.  It
has to be real, we need to understand it clearly. After
this, the masses must have it real.
Regarding the Three Jewels, reciting the Three Jewels scriptures means we
must truly be reciting the Three Jewels scriptures,
like our own words or
prayers, like
our own words, but we don't know
how to write them down yet. Our hearts are like that, do you understand?
We are not the writers; our hearts are like that. Only by
practicing like this can we
recognize ourselves.
What is practice? It's to find ourselves, to see
ourselves, to recognize ourselves. Only then
can we transform. If we haven't seen ourselves, have
n't recognized ourselves,
we can't transform. It's like a
doctor who doesn't diagnose the disease correctly; can they
cure it? We have to diagnose our
own illness, see it, and then we
know how to cure ourselves. Practice is
self-healing; no one else cures us.
The disease of greed, anger, and delusion is
our own disease, and the other one is just me learning,
just me learning. If I take the wrong
medicine, I'll take it myself, I'll die, right?
So, we have to learn on our own.  Self-diagnosis,
self-prescription, and self-medication are the only ways to
transform karma. Therefore,
our spiritual practice is a long journey. We must cultivate a
humble and self-sacrificing heart every day. Only then can we
achieve the goal of a lay
practitioner. If a lay practitioner never finds that
shameful
heart, never finds that self-sacrificing heart,
when will they ever be able to practice? Do you understand? You must
find that heart within yourself to succeed. I told you,
today, while I was
meditating, I suddenly
remembered a funny story.
While I was walking, I
heard Mr. Hai say that he should tell Ms.
Yen to go on a two-month retreat,
not just three
days. Then, when I heard his wife
say that, I found it funny because I thought his joke
had some kind of karmic consequence. I asked if you could
explain this to me. That is, when I was walking, I
remembered a
story. Do you understand?  That's
funny, right? So, everything that happens
to us has a cause and effect, everyone. Do
you see that? It's very
interesting. There are so many causes and effects that let
us know that everything in
this world has a cause and effect.
So, if a
practitioner, when they arrive there and
start to see things like that,
they say that it's not the cause, that
it belongs to the past, then naturally,
that mother and child will be saved. Do you understand? But like
this,
that mother and child haven't been saved yet, so it will be
difficult for them to have children.
[Laughs] So, with
every thought, if
we know how to practice, we will be
liberated. That's liberation, everyone.
But if we
don't know how to practice, then when people are
suffering, we still laugh. But
in this world, what is it? It's just to make the
other person feel less angry or upset, but even with that kind of
happiness, there's still karma, teacher. We're
right, aren't we? Even with happiness in this world, there's still
karma.  At that moment, when things were going well, you
had to say this and that.
Or maybe you should admit your mistake. Is that clear? Okay, I'm leaving now. I was
n't careful. I'm
leaving, I let you fall. Go, go, you
fell down here, and the baby came out here too! It's
so sad, but you didn't see it, and you laughed, trying to cover it
up. It's
beautiful, isn't it? Oh, try to practice diligently for 7 days
and dedicate the merit to your mother and child, okay? Don't bother me, okay?
So, when we
practice, this is very interesting, right? Everything
has causes and conditions, but it's in the idea. If you
say it's a sentient being, then it is a sentient being. If
you say it's not a sentient being, then it is a sentient being. If you say it's a
delusion, then it is a delusion. But in reality, there
are sentient beings in our delusions, it's not that there are
n't any sentient beings. Look, suddenly, I'm
sitting here
thinking about that woman, remembering that old woman, there are sentient beings in
all of that. But in our thoughts, there are
no sentient beings, understand? There
are sentient beings in our
thoughts, and there are sentient beings in our delusions too. Regarding the idea,
I'll bring that back, of course,
to do what? To let this person look at it?  The
other person is gazing. That means in my thoughts there
are sentient beings, and in
my delusions there are sentient beings. Do you understand? It's
impossible to be without
sentient beings. So, wanting to achieve liberation
is a big problem,
but achieving liberation brings great peace and
joy. So, whoever doesn't have a wife shouldn't
get married. Whoever gets married
[laughs]. And
whoever has a
wife and is already living a miserable life should
n't be
tempted. How can the body of a monk be in the realm of
desire but not be tainted? Always remember the
three yogis, don't cling to them. The Dharma-mind means
we should always think about the merits of a
monk and the aspirations of a
monk. Do you understand? The merits of a
monk are great. That means
we want to remember
these merits, we see that what we do in the world is nothing compared to a single thought of a monk. Do
you understand? Even if we
build countless buildings and
towers, it's nothing compared to
a single thought of a monk. Do you
see that? That's why
we become weary of the world.  But
if you don't understand this,
how can it be boring, right? You still have to
wish you could build that house,
or see that woman with the fancy car and feel
so envious. For a practitioner,
that fancy car is worth less than a cow.
People don't
crave anything, you know. They see that
as suffering, they want to throw it
away. But
when you go out to help people, you have to tell
them to do good deeds so they can get
that because their minds are craving it.
It's like someone who's
eating a lot of rice; if you give them rice,
they'll die, right?
That's why today we're learning a Dharma lesson. The
Buddha said that because sentient beings have such
heavy karmic suffering, the Buddha taught
giving, giving according to the Dharma, to lessen their
suffering. Remember that? And for those who
have already practiced meditation, material things
have no
value to them, do you understand? They don't have joy,
do you understand? Joy...
This kind of bliss is something Yen told the audience about
when she became a nun and learned about
Buddhism and decided to practice. Yen said that when you're
ignorant and don't know anything about the three thousand great worlds, you have to
go into monastic life to understand it.
That's the goal. So, you have to do everything you
can to become a nun. Do you understand? You have to do everything
you can to escape and become a nun.
Do you understand? Because
what you desire is like a
diamond. And what you have is cow dung. Do you understand?
If we're talking about
material things, what you desire is a diamond,
and what you have in your hand is
cow dung. Only by seeing this can
you let go and move on. If
you don't see this, you
can't move, you can't be strong.
You have to see this to be strong, to
not crave
the things of this world.
This journey is just like the steps
we have to take. These steps lead us
here, this is our destiny, we have to do
this. These steps lead us here, this is our destiny,
we have to do this. These steps lead us like this, this is our destiny, we have to do
this. It's like the
general public walking, we know
our destination is there, but we
have to walk step by step. Don't
wonder why it takes so long. Because if it takes so long, we
have to sit and rest, right?
The road is long because of the mind; if it's long, we
will sit and rest. So don't
think about the long road. That means we know that the
path we are walking is the road,
it has to lead to that place, so we just keep diligently
walking, okay? Don't
complain about it being too far. That would be a wasted
moment. Do you understand? You'll be slowing down
your journey. So
don't complain about it being too far.
We know the destination is like that, so
we have to keep diligently walking. Whatever destiny
we have, we just keep diligently doing it,
practicing, okay? I
hope everyone  All these people will
later have the good fortune to practice
asceticism in the forest
[Laughs]
That's my opinion, sister. Namo Buddha, the
original teacher, Shakyamuni Buddha. I respectfully ask you, sister. Then when I
started to go, I had the thought, "When I
go, I don't know if a snake will
crawl into my nest." Then I
contemplated again, "Maybe if I go, the
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas will come to protect me." "Surely
not," I contemplated again like that. That is,
you think, "When I go, a
snake will crawl into
my nest and do that." Many people
think like that, "No, it doesn't
happen." That's why, before I lay down with the snake, I was
afraid the snake would raise its head and go into
that place. That's my karma, my attachment to the body.
First, we are attached to the body.
Second, we are attached to possessions. Do you
understand? Then it will manifest this
karma, it will manifest
this delusion. That is, we have attachment to the body. If we have attachment to the
body, we must be afraid of death, right?
We have attachment to the body. What about when
we don't have it?  Regarding attachment to the body, that thought does
n't come, meaning right now, no
one can say that they've completely stopped the thought of attachment to the body. That is, at
this moment, this thought
and that thought haven't come to life yet.
Do you understand? People only become truly liberated when they completely eliminate
that thought. The four things
remain dormant
within, in relation to the karmic conditions. When encountering a situation, the
mind then reacts. That is, when the eyes see form, the
mind gives rise to desire, the mind gives rise to craving. That is, when the
eyes see
form, the mind gives rise to craving, isn't that just right?
Yen explains: it's because we have
desire from before, that's why that
is attachment. Do you understand? Desire gives rise to pleasure, that's just right.
Yen
explains: seeing the
scene below is like being on a
Vietnam Airlines plane, do you understand?
That's because we are attached to the worldly scenery, our
eyes are captivated by the form, giving rise to pleasure. Do
you understand? Even now,
when the eyes see form, the illusory thoughts
arise, do you understand? But when our eyes
see form, we don't grasp it.  In the present moment,
that delusion doesn't appear
naturally;
it eliminates past karma. But to eliminate it, you have to
practice gradually. Then that
delusion will disappear. Do you understand? So,
when you see a
snake or something coming towards
you, you must immediately realize
that this is your delusion of attachment to the body.
But later, when you go home, check
carefully, understand? Later, when you go home,
check carefully because if you think like
that, you will be at peace and move forward. Do you understand?
But if you don't think like that, and you just
let go of the thought, that's wrong. Letting go means not thinking at all, then
it will come again, again, again.
Do you understand? So, in
Buddhism, we contemplate suffering, the
cause of suffering, and the way to resolve suffering. If you can contemplate
suffering, impermanence, non-self, and emptiness, then you can be
liberated. That's what you have to contemplate.
Do you understand? This is because
attachment to the body arises. Now it's
causing me suffering.
This delusion is suffering.  I'll go back and
check. It's gone, then I'll go
inside, and there won't be a snake, so
you'll be at ease. That means we can only achieve
liberation at that low level, right?
It's only that low, but I
hope that whatever I say,
you all will understand. I
don't know how much you'll understand
because once you get outside, the
scenery is different, and you'll
forget it. If you
continue practicing in the forest
like this, you might gain
something, but if you
go out there, you'll just go back to it. And there's more, for
example, if you go out there and do
something
you like, you'll get too caught up in it, and there are
many other things. So, lay people can
only practice the Dharma of giving and the Fifteen Precepts at
most. The Buddha only allows one day
a month, eight precepts, that's all. Do you understand? It's
not like many other temples
now teach everything like this to
Buddhists. This is what Yen is saying clearly: things we
can't do, things we don't have the opportunity to do.
Okay, but they just keep teaching and spreading the teachings from
books, but the truth is, people
don't actually practice, so they just
talk. As for me, I know that this ca
n't be practiced. Because if I
practice, I'll know under what circumstances it's possible to practice
and under what circumstances it's not.
So I know what needs to be
said and what doesn't. Do they
understand? There are so many things like that, and then
Buddhists just blindly follow the
internet, spouting nonsense. They do
n't understand anything. They just read from
books and still don't understand what the
books say. I'm also someone
who's been accepted into the Sangha and trained to
speak truthfully, meaning
if I can do it, I speak; if I can't,
I don't talk about
it. It's the same here. The congregation here only
knows what they're saying. They'll go out there and
tell everything, as if they haven't done it themselves. So
I just listen, think, and
practice for myself, because
when we Buddhists leave this place,
we don't have a congregation like this
to...  Talking about it again is
inappropriate for the audience. That means it's not right. The connection is there, you understand?
Therefore, I can't tell
anyone
else. It's just that the ego speaks, the name
speaks, the audience understands, right? The name speaks, the
ego speaks. For example, the audience is
n't here. Yen has never heard
this from Yen before, never, right?
It has to have a connection, to benefit the
audience. Whatever the connection, we will
talk about that connection. Why don't the teachers tell the
audience? The audience sees it,
right? Because it's our connection that allows us to give
alms, to show respect to the Three Jewels to generate
merit. To release greed, that's
all. The teacher only teaches those Dharma teachings.
Because we have three days like
this, we only have the opportunity to
speak. Just because there are
opinions and opinions, and then you come here, and
this scene... it's like this, it's like this, it has to be like
this, it has to be
like this, it has to be able to stand here,
stand there, the explanation
is how to return to the
center like this, the things...  Secondly,
when grinding, if you encounter any
scene around you, you might have to
stop. It's
like someone passing by might
see the shell of a tree,
mostly due to the
images.
The second thing is, it's
inexplicable. Does the worldly realm and the
Buddhist teachings have any
similarities? Because the
worldly realm is bad, and when compared to the Buddhist realm, sometimes you
see the Buddhist realm as bad. Okay, I'll
explain it
clearly then.  When Khoi came up here and
saw that the camera was placed here, it was due to the
karmic practice of his past life, that is, because
his body, speech, and mind were always practicing and perfecting that,
so it would come up here and it would
arise like that
karmic practice. That karmic practice gives rise to suffering. This is
today, losing oneself, is
n't it? That karmic practice gives rise to suffering and retribution. Everything in
the world gives rise to
suffering, right? We want to focus,
but we can't, we are
controlled by karmic practice, that's suffering. Do you understand, teacher? The
cause of suffering is
our mastery, our obsession, our infatuation with
this thing. But worldly people
only cultivate merit, okay? So
this is still suitable for worldly people
because Yen has affirmed to the
public that we cannot completely sever
this karma because we lack the karmic
affinity. Tomorrow, we must go take pictures.
Taking pictures, that silly guy, if we do
n't take pictures at this place, we ca
n't perform the
Dharma manifestation in the world anymore, okay?
That's the karmic obstacle that causes us.
Currently, it's impossible to practice the Dharma of
Liberation. That's clear, isn't it? Recognizing
yourself in the present moment, do you understand? And what's
more, what is doubt?
Looking at the shell of the river and seeing this, you
see it and you doubt that someone is coming to
eat. The photographers are taking pictures because of the
mindset of the photographer. You only think about
taking pictures. And the cowherd
thinks... He says to his mother, "
Those cowherds should probably come up here to eat."
Or the cowherd sees
a group of people coming up and he thinks, "
That group should eat." Do you understand? It's also a
karmic habit that gives rise to doubts.
So from now on, when you have that thought, you say, "
I don't see, I don't know." This is a deluded thought, understood
by karma. "Seeing, not knowing, but saying 'I know,' but not hearing,
but
saying 'I hear.' That's why the Buddha forbade confusion,
confusion, not seeing, not saying.
Seeing, seeing, saying 'I don't see,' and you can
transform karma. Just practice speaking
truthfully for a while, and you will
never be trapped in this cycle. It's like this: when you
see it, you see it.  It's not that it's impossible, so don't overthink it,
because it's
irrelevant in the present. That means it's
not affected by the troubles that come to
you. Do you understand? There's
another part: what is intellect and what is wisdom?
To clarify, in the world,
people are usually just called
intellectuals, but they keep
misunderstanding, they call it wisdom. In the
world, we call someone an intellectual, not a wise person.
Wisdom is used in
Buddhism. In the world, intellect is quickness,
sharpness, and sharpness in all things;
it's very dynamic. So, being
quick, sharp, sharp, and
dynamic
in the world to do all things is called
intellect. Wisdom, on the other hand, also
requires quickness, sharpness, and observation. Only then can the
mind stop suffering. That's what wisdom is, you
understand? Knowing what
is the cause of this, what
delusion will lead to, what
suffering will this cause in the
future—that's what we call wisdom
from a person's thinking.  By observing in this way,
one can sever the karmic consequences of
one's actions—body, speech, and mind. When one acts according to the
Four Extremes, suffering
no longer arises. True understanding without thought completely
ends all actions. Wisdom
has the function of thinking and observing. Meditation and
contemplation are used to eradicate defilements and
end the cycle of suffering and rebirth. Seeing is what is
called wisdom. In the world,
we often use the word "wisdom," but people in the
world use it differently. Sometimes we
have to say, "Oh my god, that's not
wisdom!" "Oh, you're so smart!"
That's the correct word, "Oh, so smart,
so quick-witted!" Don't just praise
someone as "wisdom." You don't know if they have wisdom, you
only know they have intelligence.
For example, a foolish person is
someone without ambition. A
foolish person is someone who lacks intelligence
but creates karmic consequences; they are called
foolish. The other kind of person is just called "foolish." To
understand "not foolish" means being deluded,
clinging to delusion, and that is called
foolish. The other part is just called
...  There are two kinds of intelligence, you see, and there
are different levels of wisdom.
We have to clearly distinguish between them so
we don't get confused. Oh, then you
praise someone for being smart,
so smart! But what about when you see someone creating
karma, intentionally creating karma, that person is stupid,
but rarely do people
accept that they are stupid. They
think stupidity is something else,
but actually, the person who clings to
worldly knowledge is already stupid.
They are infatuated, that
falls into suffering, they fall into reincarnation, and they
take that suffering as joy, not
knowing, they become engrossed in that, and
then they start
conflicting with others. Then there is conflict,
clinging, attachment, clinging to what they have,
and clinging to what they have gained
from worldly knowledge, and that gives
rise to reincarnation. That's called
stupidity, do you understand? In
the process of self-cultivation, in that situation, do you
feel the health of the body and
the things that hinder it?  The most important thing is that
the process of climbing this soft path is
so cold that it's hard to avoid getting sick. It's
like, "I don't know if I'll be able to
rest for three days or not." The
question is, how do I practice and meditate so
that my health doesn't
feel so bad? It's like this:
When I was practicing and doing my duties,
I shared this with the general public. We
can apply this, meaning lay people can
apply
it. When I was practicing, I set
a standard for myself:
if my
hands could still lift, my hands would work. If my legs could still lift, my
legs would
step. Do you understand? If I could still sit up, I could
still work. That means everything
I have in this body
in the present moment, I will use it.
I'm not afraid of anything. Because I have to meditate
in the present moment. If my legs can still step,
I will still step. If my hands can still work, I will
still work. Do you understand? You
only know when you're sick. This is what illness is.
This body needs rest.  Do you understand?
But if not, I'll be plagued by
that delusion, afraid I'll get tired, afraid I'll get sick, and it will make
my body sick. That's what's called
hindering diligence, do you understand?
It hinders my diligence.
And with Yen Thi, she's set something for me.
If this opportunity is present,
something I can touch with my hands
but can't do with my feet, I'll find
things my hands can touch and
do with my
feet. But
when I can't walk and I can't touch,
then I'll follow
this body, which is treating illness.
Do you understand? Then I won't be hindered by anything, I won't be controlled by laziness. That means
nothing can hinder
my diligence, and I can be diligent in any situation.
Do you understand? That's what happened. Anyone who
went to work during Tet (Vietnamese New Year) with Yen Thi and
Duyen Thi went to work. That year, the
temple was about to be inaugurated, and
from morning till night, they worked everywhere, from one
place to another, until 9:00 PM, and they still
had to go planting.  Grass means that we still have
our hands and feet, we can still lift it and walk.
The people at the temple are still working, still helping Sister
Duyen. After looking around, Yen said, "
You ladies should go rest." But
Yen hasn't gone to rest yet, so she doesn't dare to rest. She just keeps working, looking around to
see if
Yen has rested yet.
So we just keep working within
our capabilities. As long as we can still do it, we
keep working. Because we have to depend
on the speed of the work, because
time doesn't allow it, we can
finish this job, but the next few days the work will be
finished. That's how the
temple's work is, so we can be sick for a few
days, it's okay, do you understand?
Because being sick for a few days does
n't affect anything.
Everyone can rest and play. If we're sick for a few days, that
day will give our bodies strength back. That's
the diligence. We're not sick, we're
still healthy and normal, we can still
shovel dirt and sand, working tirelessly.
Yen only eats one meal a day,
everyone! So...  Diligence will generate
great blessings for oneself;
laziness will only
increase one's negative karma. Do you understand?
It's just illness. For example, Yen works
tirelessly, then comes home and is only slightly ill.
She's only sick from night to morning,
while she's sleeping.
But I'm healthy, uncle.
So we shouldn't be afraid.
We practice with great hope that the community will
acquire a
vast and extensive body of knowledge so that we
can use it ourselves. That's why
the Buddha said that whoever can live alone
can observe the
Dharma and diligently practice it themselves. Do you understand? Right
now, the community hasn't yet
observed the Dharma and diligently practiced it themselves,
so don't leave the community, remember? You ca
n't leave the community. Only when
you can observe the Dharma yourself, detach
yourself from desires, and diligently practice it yourself,
then you can
stand alone. Leaving the community
will prevent harm and benefit the
community. When you have achieved
such mastery...  "Hold on tight to the congregation, don't
leave," Yen told the congregation, "no one should
leave the congregation, they must be diligent." She said, "In
2015, my child was very seriously ill,
so I went to see fortune tellers. The fortune tellers
said my illness was serious,
but it was also a female spirit following me, and it
also had a connection to my mother. So they told me to serve them.
Occasionally, I would
go to these rituals, and I would go to the temple to serve them. I went to the
temple in Nghe An, to the 12 temples, and many other temples, including the Mother Goddess temple.
So I
went to many fortune tellers, and
many people went with me. During her spirit possession ritual
at the temple in Nghe An, it was around
9:00. At 9:00, I
felt very tired. Then she performed 36
rituals, and I lay down on a chair. At the
temple, suddenly, I was sucked up
into the clouds. I flew for a few seconds, and when I
saw my body, it was
n't my body."
My body wasn't a demon's, but very light,
and naturally I was lying on my
right side like the Buddha. But at
that moment, I saw the sky was very bright,
surrounded by many beautiful clouds, and I was so
scared. I thought, "Why am I
up here?" Then I thought, "So I'm up here, and
now I'm staying here forever. I
can't go home, so what?"
Then I woke up, and the
sky was still dark.
I asked the medium, and she said, "There
are days of spiritual upliftment, right?
But I want to ask
why the deities there are guiding me
towards the Buddha? Why, why, why, why, why, is it that
I'm asking the fortune teller here,
are those deities guiding me towards the
path of Buddhism? I'm very suspicious, very confused. What does she mean by saying I'm cured and serving the saints, and the saints are guiding me towards the path of
Buddhism? That's my question about this. Yes,
she will...  Let me answer this question. So, there's the Provincial
Party Secretary, with such high power and authority.
Would people want to
impersonate him to do wrong things?
It's because those who don't
know better will pretend to be him. "I'm the Party Secretary,"
or "I'm a police officer." If they
pretend, those ghosts
know that nobody there knows anything about Buddha. They
impersonate him, they say he's Buddha to
make people believe them and follow their orders. Understood? Just
now, Yen told the story of
the Buddha and the snake. That means, when it sees itself
being twisted like a snake, it knows
people have to call it a snake. Do
you understand? But it can't deny its snake form, so it has to say it's a
snake
to make
people believe it. Understood?
And Yen has done a lot of things already. Anyone in the
community who goes to Huong's house in the mountains
will see what she does. When she comes back, she says she's a Bodhisattva. And what about
you, My? You go to the
Three-Time Recitation Hall and then you come back, My Hoanh.  That girl
is practicing at the temple, she goes to the
Three-Time Recitation Ceremony, and when she gets home, she becomes an
Amitabha Buddha and goes to save sentient beings,
right? She and her whole congregation
go there, and then
Nga and her whole congregation
go there, and Nga raises her hand to let
everyone know. That means she's practicing at the temple. Then
someone invites her to go to the
Three-Time Recitation Ceremony to pray for the
ancestors' souls for free, so she
sneaks away. She goes there, practices the Three-Time
Recitation Ceremony to pray for the ancestors' souls, and when she gets home,
she becomes an Amitabha Buddha and goes to save sentient beings. That's how My became My,
not just an
Amitabha Buddha. Is that clear? The
demons, because they see that we
can't see them and don't know them,
they just impersonate whatever
people like, and they'll say whatever they want.
We don't understand anything about karma. And
our karma is the
master of our karma. If we
want to be afflicted by wrong views...  The evil spirit came
in, and if you want it to possess you, it will. There's
a woman at the temple, and recently, when
she was working there, Mai, did
she manage to get it out? The house in Hai Phong... she started
hearing a voice, and it
was urging her to pray to it in the yard so it would come
into the house. Mai, do you remember that? Was
that still at the temple, doing
offerings or something? Or is it over?
Then she said, "From the day I prayed, it
possessed me completely. Now I can't get it out.
Every day
it talks to me, it makes me do
this, it makes me do that, it makes me do all sorts of things."
Minh, do you remember that woman?
She's back now, right? Curly hair?
Yes, curly hair, that's right. It means that
suddenly someone is whispering in your ear, saying they're
outside, and now they're inviting you
in. They'll be a
saint or a general or something. So you pray and
invite them in, and then it's
completely inside you. Every day it
talks to you, it urges you to do all sorts of things, and now you
can't get it out.  Being the owner of my own home,
no one can do anything to me, do
you understand? That means I have to be in control of
my own will, that's why I'm the owner.
Okay? That means I own this house,
even though it's a house from a previous life's karma.
That karma should be controlling this house,
but now I'm learning to control that karma
so that I can use
this house according to its proper purpose. Is that right?
Use it properly. Namo Buddha Shakyamuni.
Respectfully addressing the teacher and the
congregation, last night, when I
heard you lecture on the meaning of three
days of meditation in the forest, I had
a very lazy thought:
three days of meditation is just sowing the seeds of
karma. Then there are three months, then
three years, and then... I started
thinking, "Will I be able to cultivate to the point
of becoming a Buddha?"
That sounds
too fantastical. And then, will I
go from morning till night? And
today, coming up here...  Then I
had this delusion: standing
here, just a few hundred meters
above sea level, I could see everything
below, everything shrunk down so
much. The Buddha, for example, could fit the three thousand great
worlds into a single
pore. Then I had this
thought:
I'll probably never be able to
become a Buddha. When that thought arose,
I thought, "
Okay, every day I'll just make a
vow to rely on the future, for all eternity,
so that wherever I'm reborn, I'll
meet my master, the great monks,
Ms. Yen, and the
Dharma center again. Then, somehow, Ms. Yen will
have to help me. So, somehow,
I have to achieve enlightenment before
Ms. Yen can enter Dipankara. Isn't that
being lazy? That
's the first thought. Secondly,
yesterday I heard Ms. Yen talking about having to
go to the toilet up here, and
she asked if I was scared.
So I said very loudly, "If you're scared,
then that fear will still
haunt you." Today, while going on alms rounds, at
noon I stood next to an elderly man in the
same temple hall. He was older than me, and we
talked. We were talking about eating less, to
avoid having to go to the toilet so often, because it was
very scary. He said, "
Normally, I'm very constipated, so I
hope I only have to go
once
at the temple." Then
she said, "
Well, tomorrow morning, if I get a box of milk
and a biscuit, but drinking milk makes me have to
go to the toilet so often, then I'll just eat the
biscuit." And the milk can be left on the
way home to drink to relieve fatigue.
So, I asked her, "
What is the cause of this, and is it laziness? Amitabha Buddha, I respectfully ask the
congregation, that in
this world, even a child hears
that they have to cook rice, that they
see you doing all sorts of things, that they..."  Are you afraid? Are
you afraid, everyone? Because we are
adults, we cook rice, we pick vegetables, we cook
rice, we cook this dish, that dish, and a child is only 10
years old. When they see us, they see us and we tell them to
cook. Are they afraid? Are
they afraid? Are they afraid? But as
time goes by, they grow up, and each day they practice a dish.
By the time they cook, will they still be afraid?
No. If they don't practice each dish,
will they know how to cook? So here we are,
practicing little by little.
So we have to go to the light, going from
not knowing how to cook to something else. We know how to cook, but
we are going from darkness to something else to light.
Why would we say we can
go from light to darkness? This is
going to... And as for achieving enlightenment, because of
our karma, being born after the Buddha
in this Age of Decline, our own minds
have a lot of evil karma. We
must recognize it and we must develop the intention to cultivate. When we cultivate,
nothing is boring, nothing is lazy, nothing is
tiring, we don't say when we will reach it. Just
like you said, I just practiced walking meditation
so that I could contemplate that I am
not...  There's no boredom, no laziness, no need to go all the way
to the destination, just
go slowly according to your health and abilities.
So if you can do it,
you must do it; if you can cultivate, you must
cultivate. And what about saying, "I'll eat less to avoid having to defecate because defecating is too disgusting"? That's wanting to get sick because of that. It's not just hunger, right? If you're hungry, how can you observe anything?
You're just wasting your energy, what can you
observe? So,
this is just death,
not cultivation.
[Laughs]
So you have to know
your own bad karma, then you have to cultivate a diligent mind
and transform it, okay? Tomorrow,
take the same amount as your breakfast, tomorrow,
drink milk, okay? Why are
others hindering your cultivation? Because
you yourself are hindering your cultivation,
Thuy, understand? That means you yourself are hindering
your cultivation, so that cause is still
there. So why don't the people around
you hinder you? Do you understand? The cause is that
you must be diligent.  If others
don't hinder my own diligence,
then I can encourage others to
practice. Do you understand? That's why
the Buddha had 18 non-common practices:
diligence that doesn't increase or decrease, and being consistent at all times. We, on the other hand,
increase or decrease it whenever we feel like it, but the Buddha's diligence
doesn't increase or decrease, depending on circumstances. He perfected it wherever he was.
Yen will give an example of
rice to make it clear: if today I'm
assigned to cook rice, I cook it
excellently; if tomorrow I'm assigned to sweep the house, I sweep it
excellently; if the day after tomorrow I'm assigned to
wash dishes, I wash them excellently. Do you
understand? It's not like I like
cooking rice, so when it comes to cooking rice, I
increase my efforts.  I'm tired of sweeping the house, sweeping the
house again and again. I dare to say to the assembly, understand? That is, the
Buddha was diligent, never increasing or decreasing in
all circumstances, he was perfectly fulfilled.
Understand? We must practice that.
Whatever task is assigned to us,
we must do it joyfully and fully. Understand? For
example, today you guys are assigned to shovel dirt,
I shovel dirt with all my might. Tomorrow, if you assign me to
wash dishes, I wash dishes with all my might. That's how we cultivate
diligence, do
n't let it decrease. That's right, don't let it decrease,
then later our practice
will be easier. Understand? Don't let diligence decrease. As for
our assembly, if
today I feel like teaching, tomorrow
I feel like sleeping in. How can we
not dare? And as for our work,
we must prepare for it.
For example, you guys are in charge of information. If
you work during the day, you
must sleep at night. That means we must be fully mindful, understand?
For example, if you work for a day, you sleep for 8
hours, or 7 hours,
but because of the work you do,
tomorrow the work won't be busy.
Then I can catch up on sleep. But if
he's busy, I'll try to go for a day or two. That means
I have to check my health carefully,
otherwise people will
say I'm becoming an
ascetic. If I get sick tomorrow and collapse, how can I possibly practice asceticism with my
body? Understood? But
before, Yen said she'd only be doing it for five days. She said
she'd only be sick for five days, and
after those five days she'd help me
recover. That means I have to be
observant and think thoroughly.
[music]